# About

Sensing Skies is a website, published as part of a wider research project exploring the shift in European border control from sea to sky. It analyses how the European Border and Coast Guard (also called Frontex) conducts and increases aerial control above the border and simultaneously stopped undertaking search and rescue by themselves but detect boats in distress from above and then delegates them to the so-called Libyan Coast Guard – leading to a highly surveilled border zone with more interceptions than ever before. This part of the research is truing the sky above the sea and the sensing of this border zone’s increased aerial control. Sensing _Skies_ is an investigative tool, that tries to track and visualise the way the European Union is taking its borders to the sky by mapping the recorded flight tracks on top of each other, creating a heat map of their aerial focus. The Map allows Users to explore different timeframes or select single flight tracks and show additional information, like date and duration. This Information Platform is intended to provide and add to further research and activism in the area and is an ongoing project.

The following stories relate the situation in the Mediterranean and the archived tracks to the reality of people crossing the border, affected by its aerial surveillance. They exemplify how aircrafts change the likelihood of an interception leading to violent pull-backs to Libya. The Visualizations on this Website are created out of an ADS-B dataset. ADS-B stands for Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast, a method to locate the position of aircrafts once per second. The information is sent to other aircrafts and air traffic control ground stations or other receivers. This signal can get lost, for example when the aircraft flies low because of the curvature of the earth and when there is no other airplane to receive its signal and pass it on. Most air tracking websites are getting geodata by volunteer collectors and in some areas, feeders are low, making it more difficult to receive data. The tracks visualized here may include glitches and faults. When the signal is lost at one point for example and reappears at another place these point could appear connected. Though there might be fault in the tracks, it shows the general tendency of the area of surveillance and some of the tracks might be connected to pull-backs.
